vui] numeras. 117

Two. We have a dual form, duo'p (originally before vowels),
dud (before consonants): in composition also ἀμᾶ- (δξώδτεα),
dp· (bf-fr, bis). The form δύο as well as δύο) appears in
Homer, who uses it as indeclinahle. In later Greek we find
plural forms δύας, δυσί, etc„ and so exclusively in Latin.

Three. Sfem trega lri-, in τρεῖς, fret (lrep'es), rpf-r, τρίτος.

F our. Stems quetpdr-‚ qtur-. The relation of these forms
is an exceedingly difficult question. Sanskrit has a cardinal
corbaras, an ordinal turfyas, apparently for kur-pas, showing
the reduced stem. Greek has τέττορετ and τέτορες (Dorio),
τέσσερες (lonic), τέτταρες (Attio), shewing a vowel gradation
in the last syllable 0f the stem. The Homeric πίσυρες is said

to be Aeolio, and seems to represent the reduced stem qtur- ’

’ with the velar becoming π before the dental, the ι being
inserted for the sake of euphony. In τέτρτ-τοε, τέττρ-τος the
phas left no trace. The reduced root perhaps appears in
τρυ-φάλεια for πτρυ-φαλεια (I.·.E qius).

In Latin the a of quattuor is a difficulty, hut que· is un-
known in Latin at the beginning of a word except when
’ followed by r, and as the regular *cottuor would have borne
no resemblance to the cognate forms, the a may have been
introduced from the ordinal quartur. The d in quadruplex,
etc. is unexplained.

Five. I.-E. pe‘rrqe, Sk. patrica, Gk. πέντε, Latin quinque for
*penque by an assimilation of the labial to the guttural as
prope stands for proque (cf. proximus). πέμπτος, quin(c)tus
are regular. ,

Six. I.-E. tgulis, Sk. reia, Gk. έξ, Lat. sex.

Seven. l.-E. seplga Sk. raptu, Gk. ἑπτά, Lat. reptem.

Er‘glrt. 1.-E. autogr), Sk. ostri, ortua, Gk. ὀκτώ, Lat. ocfo.

Nr'ne. I.-E. ne‘pgr, Sk. uduo, Gk. &vuffa Lat. nouem. The
Greek ordinal shews a single nasal in ἔνατος. The details of
the various forms and the meaning of the first syllable in

Greek are obscure.
Teu. 1.-E. defuga, Sk. dtfpa, Gk. δέκα, Lat. decem.

 

